
1. Owen Barder thinks of development as a complex system property rather than a sum of individual parts to include citizens, firms, and government agencies. Embodying this perspective towards development prompts analysts to consider how to influence the acceleration of evolution and improve adaptability to changes throughout the world. This idea that development is non-linear and  unpredictable with many interworking variables, is similar to Amartya Sen’s assertion that individual freedoms are interconnected, “strengthening their joint importance.”

2. Thomas Thwaits was a British design student who tried to make a toaster from completely raw materials. He substituted convenience for primitivity, using iron ore, melted by a leaf blower in a trash can, to turn it into steel. This was so challenging in itself that he almost gave up, proving how challenging it is to build even a rather simple appliance completely from scratch without taking advantage of the specialization and the convenience that the economy has provided for society. The toaster barely worked before catching on fire. Barder uses this anecdote to support his claim that development is not an increase in output in individuals, as Thwaits’ well-being was not significantly enriched by this project.

3. Ghana and South Korea had comparable incomes per person in 1960, until South Korea’s skyrocketed. The Solow model explains that increases in labor and capital lead to this development, but there is another unexplained variable of technical change. Ghana had negative technological growth, while South Korea had great growth in this area. However, exchange of knowledge is free, so Ghana should have reasonable access to technology at this point, os there must be another factor. Economists came up with the idea that ineffective government policies were the problem. Governments then began to implement policies based on the “Washington Consensus,” which recommended 10 reforms to improve the economic state of developing countries.

4. The Harrod-Domar model illustrates that an increase in capital and/or labor will cause an increase in output. Developing countries do not seem to have a shortage of labor, they must need an increase in capital. Walter Rostow is an author who claimed that there is a positive feedback loop that can explain development. If investment riess, capital stock rises, sso output rises, creating higher incomes, more savings, leading to, once again, an increase in investment. His model was very popular as it allowed developing countries to quantify the amount of foreign investment they needed in order to initiate this cycle.

5. The Solow model agrees with the Harrod-Domar model that increases in labor and capital lead to this development, but there is another unexplained variable that he calls technical change. This model has significant issues. Technological change is spurred by the spread of knowledge, which is free and cannot depreciate. 

6. The Washington Consensus suggested ten reforms that should be prioritized in government policy especially in developing countries. These reforms were suggested so that they may replace the bad government policies that many economists blamed for poor economic performance in developing countries. Some of the reforms were successful, such as the improvement in Sub-Saharan public deficits and exchange rates, however, it is largely deemed a failure.

7. 
